
   Tom Turpin
   Greatest Cartridges of All Time
   Introduction
   A Debate with Plenty of Ammo [Êàðòèíêà: i_001.jpg] 
   Figuring out the greatest cartridges of all time has the benefit of having to test a ton of ammo.
   I’ll ask the question for you esteemed reader, what divine proclamation anointed your humble scribe the guru of all the cartridges that exists? The answer is simple, there is no such anointment. Well, perhaps my publisher indicated such, but that certainly isn’t divine providence.
   I have, however, had a long and varied shooting and hunting career. I received my first firearm, a Winchester youth rifle (a Model 68 I believe it was), single-shot .22 RF, at the ripe old age of six years. If I make it to Mid-August this year, I’ll turn seventy-six. Math has never been my strong suite, but I think that gives me seventy years of shooting experience.
   In addition, for more than four decades, I have earned at least a part of my living writing about shooting, hunting, and firearms. I also spent twenty-six years wearing a US Army uniform as a professional soldier.
   In that time, I’ve shot just about every commercially available cartridge at least a few times. Those that I’ve not personally fired, I’ve generally witnessed them in action, either on the range or in the field.
   The smallest I’ve shot is the.17 rimfire, and the largest, a .600 Nitro Express. I have never known anyone that owned a.700 NE, and the last time I had any information on the subject a single round of.700 ammo was $100.00 or more. I’ll leave that one to one of the youngsters in the business.
   I have learned a few things in my seven-decade shooting career so far. One is that shooters are a finicky lot with a strong tendency to pick a lot of nits.
   The truth be told, practically speaking that is, we have at least ten or fifteen times the number of cartridges available that any reasonably sane person could possibly justify needing. However, since when does NEED enter into the decision making process. The fact that one wants some off-the-wall, ten-times duplicated cartridge is enough justification. If need was the determining factor, most of the rifle and ammunition manufacturers would have gone out of business eons ago. [Êàðòèíêà: i_002.jpg] 
   Truly we live in the golden age of ammo. There are more calibers and cartridges available now then at any other time in the history of firearms.
   The average North American hunter, for example, could make it very nicely with only three or four rifles. Add a couple handguns and a couple shotguns, and he could handle anything in North America very handily. For the International hunter, add one more rifle and he’d be set for anything from a titmouse to a T-Rex.
   One of the most experienced hunters that I knew, the late C. J. McElroy, took just about every animal on our earth with one rifle, a .300 Weatherby Mark V. He did, later in life, switch to a 7mm Weatherby Mark V with its softer recoil. He told me he couldn’t tell any difference in killing power between the two. Another, the late Grancel Fitz, took all twenty-five legal species of North American game, using but one rifle, a Griffin& Howe .30–06. Those two examples should answer the NEED debate quite nicely.
   I will add one thing, however, neither Mr. McElroy nor Mr. Fitz were gun nuts. Both were pragmatic men that viewed their rifle as a tool, and nothing more.
   Mr. McElroy’s rifle was a stock factory Weatherby Mark V .300, and when he retired it in favor of another, but chambered for the 7mm Weatherby, the .300 was the most dilapidated rifle I think I’ve ever seen. It looked as though Mac had used it for a boat anchor for at least a decade or two. At least, Mr. Fitz had Griffin& Howe make his rifle for him. He treated it a bit better than Mac did his, but nevertheless it was still a tool to him.
   However, when rifle, handgun, or shotgun nuttiness enters the equation, all sanity and reason goes out the window.
   Pragmatism gives way to silliness. The nits get smaller and smaller, but picking them gets more and more frequent. I can’t condemn anyone for this malady, as I am one of the better examples of the genre. Even so, if forced to do so, I could eliminate most of my vault contents and pretty much be unaffected in a practical sense in the field, or on the range, or defending my Arizona pea patch.
   What follows then is a listing of cartridges that I have found to be as good or better than most in their category, and why I’ve found them to be so.
   Chapter 1
   The Eminently Useful .22 Rimfire [Êàðòèíêà: i_003.jpg] 
   Outside the recent ammo shortage, the .22 Rimfire might be one of the most ubiquitous rounds in the shooting world. A great majority of shooters sent a .22 bullet down range the first time they pulled the trigger.
   The little rimfire round is one of the most useful cartridges ever developed. I have not been without at least one firearm so chambered in more than 69 years.
   I presently have three rifles and one handgun, including a rifle that I’ve owned for about 65 years. It was my second rifle ever. My dad traded the first, a single shot Winchester Model 68, in on a Marlin Model 81-DL repeater when I felt that I had outgrown the single shot. My ammo bill went up appreciably with that acquisition.
   I bought my ammo at Bill Williams’s general store for the hefty price of one penny per round. A ten round purchase was about the most I could ever afford at one time.
   My new Marlin was deadly accurate and I kept the local population of starlings, squirrels, cottontail rabbits, possums and ground hogs pretty much in check, so long as I could come up with a nickel or two for ammo. I usually reserved my meager supply of ammo for serious purposes, and used my Daisy BB gun for the more mundane shooting.
   Ten cents doesn’t sound like much today, but back then it was a lot of money and squandering it on less than necessary usage was deeply frowned by my dad. A product of the great depression, he wasted nothing. I had to account for each round of the precious rimfire ammo.
   Over the years, I’ve owned a number of handguns chambered for the little rimfire. Alas I recently sold my next-to-last remaining handgun so chambered. It was a Smith& Wesson Model 18 Combat Masterpiece with target trigger and hammer. I’ve also owned and used several Colt Woodsman semi-autos, as well as a Colt Ace or three. I’ve had Ruger Single-Sixes, High Standard semi-autos, and both Harrington& Richardson and Iver Johnson revolvers.
   I once had a S&W Model 34 Kit Gun chambered for the rimfire. I usually carried it with me when deer and antelope hunting, to administer the coup de gras if necessary, and whatever else I might need it for. I’ve long since lost track of all that have come and gone through my hands, but all have been handy and useful, as well as a lot of fun. [Êàðòèíêà: i_004.jpg] 
   Many use the .22 Rimfire as a plinking load, but it also has many practical applications. For small varmints, there might not be a better or more economical round.
   Perhaps the best use for the cartridge is as a training and practice round. Just about every kid learns to shoot with .22 RF chambered firearm. However, it does have some serious applications.
   For example, during my college days, I was a ROTC cadet for all four years, and shot competitively on the collegiate rifle team. I thought I had died and gone to heaven when they issued me a new Winchester Model 52D rifle, all the ammunition I could shoot, and keys to the indoor rifle range. I shot that same Model 52 all four years on the team and really hated to have to turn it in upon graduation. I don’t have any idea how many rounds I used during those collegiate years, but it was a bunch — many thousands to be sure.
   In the hands of a good marksman who is careful with his shots, it is very effective on small game and varmints. One of our best squirrel hunters in my part of Appalachia was Lonnie Murphy. While most local squirrel hunters used shotguns, Lonnie used nothing but his trusty Winchester Model 61 pump. He also wasted no meat as he shot all his squirrels in the head! I had the pleasure of hunting with him a few times and he taught me a lot about hunting the delicious little rodents.
   When I was growing up, there were three varieties of 22 RF ammo widely available. They were classified as shorts, longs, and long rifle. Most of the available rifles were chambered for all of the three varieties. A few, mostly so-called Gallery rifles, were chambered for the 22 short only. Every county fair and/or traveling carnival, had at least one shooting gallery equipped with rifles shooting .22 shorts only.
   I’m sure that shorts and longs are still loaded in modest quantities, but they have largely disappeared and replaced by the vastly more popular long rifle variety. Though I’ve not been to a carnival in a very long time, I believe the shooting galleries have also gone the way of the dodo bird. There may still be a few around, but in today’s phobia with political correctness, I doubt it.
   I’ve been told, and I have read of Eskimo hunters in the Arctic shooting polar bears with the .22 RF. I don’t think I’d want to participate in such a feat, but no doubt, it has happened. The only time that I was ever in an Eskimo hunting camp, the lone rifle in camp was a .223 chambered rifle held together with hose clamps. I didn’t see them shoot it, but I’d guess that they would have to close the range to a few feet to hit anything with it. Perhaps that is the reason that they can get away with such small cartridges on large game.
   Chapter 2
   The Revolutionary 7mm Mauser [Êàðòèíêà: i_005.jpg] 
   The Spanish Mauser, firing 7x57mm cartridges, was used with great effect by the Spanish in the Spanish-American War. It was among the first of a number of late 19th- early 20th-Century conflicts the 7mm Mauser cartridge proved its worth.
   If Paul Mauser had not developed this cartridge in 1892, and had Spain not adopted it as their military cartridge a year later, we might not have developed and then adopted the .30–06 in 1906. At the time of the Spanish-American conflict in 1898, the US Army was armed with the .30–40 Krag cartridge loaded with a 220 grain round-nose bullet at a muzzle velocity of 2000 fps. The rifle for it by Krag-Jorgensen had to be loaded a single cartridge at a time, whereas the Spanish troops were armed with Mauser 93, which was loaded from a clip, a much faster method.
   At the major battle of the campaign, about 6,500 U.S. soldiers attacked around 750 Spanish defenders in and around San Juan Hill. While the US forces prevailed, they did so at a very high price. About twice the number of defenders were casualties on the US side. Later assessments by US military authorities of the battle results concluded that the reason for the substantial casualties suffered by the US forces was that they were out-gunned by the Spanish defenders and their Model 93 Mauser rifles chambered for the 7x57mm cartridge. Not long after this finding, the US came out with the .30–03 cartridge and the 1903 Springfield rifle modified soon thereafter to the .30–06 cartridge. Not only was the 7x57 cartridge a proven military round, it was quickly loaded in civilian guise for the sporting market.
   Germany found a ready market for their cartridge and Mauser actions in England. Sport hunters quickly learned that the cartridge was a great hunting round. It was an efficient killer of game while delivering very modest recoil to the shooter. The old firm of John Rigby produced a goodly number of their fine rifles for the 7x57, which they chose to call the .275 Rigby. Perhaps its best known proponent was W.D.M. “Karamojo” Bell. John “Pondoro” Taylor reports in his landmark book on African Rifles and Cartridges, that Bell killed 1,011 elephants during his career, “practically all of which he shot with his Rigby-Mauser of this caliber” (.275 Rigby). Jim Corbett of The Man-Eaters Kumaon fame, used a .275 Rigby as his #2 rifle. With it, he shot all manners of tigers and leopards in India.
   It’s popularity as a sporting cartridge didn’t take long to cross the Atlantic. Most major US rifle manufacturers, sooner or later, chambered rifles in for the cartridge. One of the rarer pre-64 Model 70 chamberings was for the 7x57.
   Outdoor writer icon Jack O’Connor was an early fan of the cartridge. Both he and his wife Eleanor were big fans, but it was Eleanor’s favorite and most used rifle. It was a custom job that Jack had built for himself. Metalsmith Tom Burgess did all the metalwork and Russell Leonard crafted the stock. Eleanor tried the rifle and after having the stock shortened a bit, decided that it had to be hers. She used it for the vast majority of her hunting from then on. She used it to take a 44-1/4 inch Dall ram that won a Boone& Crockett medal in 1963. She took it to Mozambique in 1962 and shot seventeen animals with nineteen shots. Jack wrote in his book, The Hunting Rifle,“The only animal that took more that one shot was a kudu bull that didn’t know when it was dead.” [Êàðòèíêà: i_006.jpg] 
   Two 7x57mm cartridges (left) next to 7.5x55 Swiss / GP11 (mid), 308 Winchester and .223 Remington (right).
   Jack finally got his own 7x57 chambered rifle a few years later, in 1957, when he contacted Winchester and inquired about a Model 70 in 7x57. The Winchester folks told him that they had exactly one 7mm barrel left and they’d do up a rifle for him. He sent it to Al Biesen who shortened the barrel to 22", stocked it in a nice stick of French walnut, and mounted a Weaver K4 scope in Redfield mounts. He used it on quite a few hunts after that, including taking it to Namibia and Zimbabwe.
   The C.I.P established maximum pressure for the cartridge is 56,5565 psi. The SAAMI maximum average pressure is set at 51,000 psi, in deference to the older Mauser still around in that chambering. A modern rifle in that cartridge should be perfectly safe at 60,000 psi. I wouldn’t hesitate to load cartridges at that pressure level for use in my semi-custom Ruger rifle, or in a custom rifle on a pre-64 Model 70 action that I once owned but stupidly let get away from me.
   The 7x57 has been around for a long time, but even so, the one- rifle North American hunter could do far worse than the little 7mm as his/her choice of cartridge provided, the big bears weren’t on the menu. It leaves little to be desired on the table. It is difficult to argue with success and one look at Eleanor O’Connor’s track record with it should be sufficient.
   Chapter 3
   The Versatility of the .357 H&H Magnum [Êàðòèíêà: i_007.jpg] 
   Box of .375 H&H cartridges with UNI–Classic 300-gr Bullets. The .375 is one of the most widely utilized cartridges in the world.
   The .375 Belted Rimless Nitro Express, better known these days as the .375 H&H Magnum, is a medium-bore cartridge developed by the renowned British firm of Holland& Holland in 1912 as a one-upmanship on the Teutonic 9.3x62 cartridge, introduced some seven years earlier.
   During the early twentieth century and earlier, many of the European powers were in expansive moods. Africa was one of their major expansion targets to increase their empires. Great Britain, along with Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Germany and perhaps another or two, were busy carving out territories there.
   One thing these early colonists learned early on was the critters they encountered in Africa were nothing like those inhabiting the hedgerows of Europe and the UK. Africa’s wildlife had many species with the will and capability of biting back in spades. There was an ever-increasing demand for affordable rifles and ammunition capable of dealing with these animals.
   The London and Birmingham gun trade in the UK supplied many such arms and ammo, but the English-built rifles could hardly be considered affordable by the settling farmers. The majority of the British large bore rifles capable of taking on the dangerous game of Africa at the time, were expensive double rifles, with a few single-shot rifles thrown in for good measure.
   They were, by and large, superb quality rifles, mostly hand-made, and they and their ammunition were expensive. Otto Bock, a German gun maker, threw a monkey wrench into the English knickers when he introduced the 9.3x62 cartridge in 1905, and chambered many Mauser 98 rifles for this capable round.
   The combination of the dangerous game capable cartridge, chambered in the comparatively inexpensive Mauser 98 rifle, was an immediate hit. Shortly after its introduction, most of the British manufacturers set about coming up with their own designs to compete with the Teutonic marvel, including Holland& Holland.
   H&H chose a design that featured a rather long case with a long, slow taper. Since the shoulder was pretty small, H&H used a belted case for better headspace control, only the second cartridge to do so.
   The powder used at the time was cordite, which consisted of long strands of propellent, rather than granules. The long slow tapered case facilitated the loading process, and contributed to almost fool-proof feeding and extraction, a big advantage, particularly in tropical climates. [Êàðòèíêà: i_008.jpg] 
   The .375 H&H cartridge (middle) bracketed by the .458 Lott (left) and the .458 Winchester Magnum (right).
   The downside is that the cartridge length required a longer length action. It is possible, with substantial machining, to fit the cartridge in a standard length Model 98 Mauser action, but generally it is not a good idea.
   If a world-wide hunter wanted to hunt anything on the planet with but a single rifle, the .375 H&H is one of, if not the best all-around choice. Commercially loaded ammunition is available just about everywhere, and practically every hunting camp in Africa has at least a box or two around.
   It is loaded in primarily two bullet weights, 270 and 300 grains. In the past it was also available in a bullet weight of 235 grains, but I’ve not seen any in decades. I’m not sure it is even loaded in the bullet weight anymore, but that doesn’t matter. The two bullet weights that are readily available everywhere cover the planet nicely.
   Jack O’Connor was a great admirer of the cartridge, and used it extensively, mostly on the big cats, lions and tigers. John “Pondoro” Taylor, author of the bible on African Rifles& Cartridges and so titled, raconteur, avid hunter, and highly successful elephant poacher, also thought very highly of the cartridge.
   He wrote that one of his rifles in that chambering had accounted for more than 100 elephant and some 411 buffalo, besides rhino, lions and lesser game. He also wrote,“Altho my formula gives this rifle a Knock-Out value of 40 points, I must regretfully admit that does not really do full justice to it. In actual practice the stopping power of the .375 Magnum would seem to warrant a higher classification.”
   Originally a proprietary cartridge loaded exclusively for H&H, they released it to the trade after WWI, and it eventually made its way to the USA. Winchester apparently saw some marketing promise and began manufacturing rifles chambered for it in 1925.
   It became quite popular for American safari hunters and also brown bear guides in Alaska, and still is. I currently have three rifles chambered for this magnificent cartridge, and will never be without at least one in my battery.
   Actually, largely due to the vast improvements in bullet design and construction, it is a more efficient cartridge today than it has ever been. But then, so are all the rest of today’s cartridges.
   Chapter 4
   The Indispensable .45 ACP [Êàðòèíêà: i_009.jpg] 
   Over the past 100 years, the .45 ACP has become one of the most iconic American pistol cartridges every devised.
   The .45 ACP cartridge was a development of necessity. It was designed in 1904 by one of our most prolific firearms geniuses, the brilliant John Moses Browning, to be used in his newly designed Colt semi-automatic pistol.
   At the time of the Moro Rebellion in the Philippines, the US Cavalry there was armed with double action handguns chambered for both the .45 Colt and .38 Long Colt cartridges, and the .30–40 Krag rifle. The Moro insurgents proved to be a formidable opponent. Both the .38 Long Colt and the .30–40 Krag cartridges proved to be largely deficient in stopping the Moro warriors effectively.
   Largely as a result of the Philippine experience and the results of the Thompson-LaGarde testing of 1904, the US Army and the US Cavalry decided that a minimum of .45 caliber would be required for any new military handgun.
   At the time, Colt and John Browning were working on a .41 caliber cartridge for Browning’s newly designed pistol. They then modified both the pistol and cartridge resulting in the Model 1905 pistol and the new .45 ACP cartridge.
   After considerable experimentation involving several different government departments and other involved American companies, they settled on a load consisting of a 230-grain bullet with a muzzle velocity of 850 fps.
   In 1906, the army decided to conduct a series of tests to determine the best pistol to be adopted as the military’s new sidearm, and invited the firearms industry to submit their example to be tested. Models from three manufacturers made it through the first series of tests, Colt, DWM, and Savage. One company, DWM, even though they had made the cut in the first round, withdrew, leaving a shoot-off (no pun intended) between Colt and Savage for the gold medal.
   The second trial was held in 1910, with the Browning designed Colt handily coming out on top. It was then adopted as the Model 1911, now an icon among handguns. From that time until 1985, the 1911, and the modification of it, the 1911 A1, chambered for the .45 ACP, was the standard firearm of the US military, a very long time, attesting to the success of the handgun for military applications. It was eventually replaced by the Beretta M9 9mm, although some units retained the 1911A1 as their primary sidearm. [Êàðòèíêà: i_010.jpg] 
   The 1911 pistol is one of the main reasons why the .45 ACP grew in popularity. After 74 years of service as the U.S. Military’s sidearm, the pistol and its cartridge more than proved they were battle ready.
   As a youngster, surplus 1911A1s were common items in gun shops, pawnshops and at gun shows. They were not very expensive and surplus .45ACP ammo was plentiful and cheap. The first one I can remember that came my way in a trade was a surplus 1911A1 that someone had chrome plated and fitted with simulated stag grips.
   I got the pistol and 100 rounds of surplus military ammo for something like $25.00. That would have been in the late 1950s I believe. At the time, I thought the combination was the cat’s meow. In retrospect, it was pretty hideous although it shot well and would have served its purpose admirably if needed.
   The ballistics of the .45 ACP is pretty anemic by today’s standards. Even though the standard military load of a 230-grain FMJ bullet at 830 fps is, by most assessments, formidable, ammo manufacturers are continually tinkering with the round.
   The SAAMI max pressure is set at 21,000 psi. Higher and higher velocities seems to be the holy grail of loading ammo these days, and consequently, SAAMI approved a pressure increase to 23,000 psi for .45 ACP +P ammo. Why, I can’t say.
   For home defense and self defense purposes, it has done very nicely without the increased pressure. It seems to me that the increased pressure and therefore velocity, is a solution to a nonexistent problem.
   Added to that opinion, there is a downside to adding pressure to the cartridge. While the standard military .45 ACP cartridge, fired in a Colt 1911A1 or one of the many, many equivalent clones, is by no means a horrifically recoiling combination, it does require training to master. Add to the recoil, and one must also add to the training.
   The most common complaint that I heard during my military career when on the pistol range with the 1911A1 firing standard ball ammo, was that it kicked too hard.
   Chapter 5
   The .30 WCF, Better Known as the .30-30 [Êàðòèíêà: i_011.jpg] 
   For many years, the .30–30 was the most popular cartridge in North America. In part, this acclaim grew due to the cartridge’s usefulness in deer hunting.
   Introduced to the public in 1895 and mated up with the Winchester Model 94 lever action rifle, this duo was the most popular rifle and cartridge in North America for a long time. They are both still quite popular today.
   The Model 94 was the first commercial rifle specifically developed for use with smokeless powder. Last count I had, more than 7.5 million had been produced and sold, the vast majority of which were chambered for the .30–30.
   Other manufacturers have also manufactured rifles chambered for the cartridge. Two other lever action rifles, ones made by Marlin and the Savage Model 99 were available in .30–30. Mossberg also made a few lever action models for the cartridge.
   Some single shot rifles have also been available in .30–30, most notably those made by Thompson-Center, and I believe that I’ve seen a Stevens and Savage single shot rifle so chambered.
   Very few bolt-action rifles have been made for the .30–30 as the cartridge uses a rimmed case which is generally unsuited for bolt actions. A few did make their way to market though.
   Early on, Winchester chambered its Model 54 bolt-action rifle for the .30–30, but it did poorly in the marketplace. Stevens and Savage produced a bolt-action model or two for the cartridge and the Remington Model 788 was also available for the .30–30.
   The cartridge got its name from the fact that it had a bullet diameter of 30 caliber, and its original loading used 30 grains of smokeless powder. Although it has been factory loaded for an assortment of bullet weights from 110 grain to 170 grains, plus an assortment of cast bullet weights are available for it, the 150-grain and 170-grain factory loads are the most popular.
   Until the introduction by Hornady of the Leverevolution bullet, all bullets intended for the cartridge were either flat-nosed or round-nosed in design and construction. This was caused by safety concerns with the tubular magazines of the Winchester and Marlin lever action rifles.
   It has been a very popular round for deer hunting in the eastern US, and equally popular in the western US as a saddle gun/pickup truck gun. Lever action Winchester model 92s and 94s were popularized in Hollywood western movies, which, I suspect, had much to do with its overwhelming acceptance. The compactness, lightweight, and very modest recoil, of most rifles chambered for the .30–30 also had a great deal to do with its popularity. [Êàðòèíêà: i_012.jpg] 
   Like so many American cartridges, the .30–30 has a somewhat confusing name. The .30 connotes the cartridge is a 30 caliber, the other 30, however, is less intuitive. It comes from the cartridges original loading using 30 grains of smokeless powder.
   Even though the cartridge is loaded to modest velocities, these days the 150 grain around 2,400 fps, the 160 grain around 2,300 fps, and the 170 grain at 2,200 fps, it is perfectly adequate for moderate range hunting for animals the size of deer and black bear.
   I would estimate that Canadian hunters have taken a ton of moose and caribou with it. It is difficult to make a satisfactory argument with success, although I wouldn’t personally take one on a moose hunt unless it was all that I had. There are better choices.
   I have two friends of mine that have Thompson Center handguns chambered for the .30–30, and they are superbly accurate. They use handloaded ammunition with pointed boat-tail bullets in their single shot TCs, and they are as scary accurate as any rifle I’ve come across, and more so than most.
   One of these days when I have nothing better to do and a few extra bucks in my pocket, I’ll pick up a TC Contender rifle chambered for the .30–30 just to see how well I can make it shoot. I’d almost bet that groups in the .2s are achievable. It’ll be fun to find out.
   I don’t have a lot of experience with TC rifles, having owned but one, but the seem to be exceptionally accurate. The two that my friends own chambered for the .30–30, and my rifle chambered for the .338 Federal, are all capable of teeny tiny groups.
   Chapter 6
   O’Connor’s Baby, the .270 Winchester [Êàðòèíêà: i_013.jpg] 
   The .270 Winchester has become one of the most celebrated hunting cartridges. Famed outdoor writer Jack O’Connor couldn’t say enough good things about the cartridge.
   One of my favorite cartridges, and the one I’ve personally used more than any other in a lifetime of hunting, is the .270 Winchester.
   I was turned on to the cartridge by reading Jack O’Connor’s magazine articles and books. I grew up reading O’Connor’s prose when he was the Arms& Ammunition Editor of Outdoor Life magazine, and arguably the most influential outdoor writer ever.
   Winchester engineers developed the cartridge in 1923, and introduced it to the shooting public in their new Model 54 rifle in 1925. The hype accompanying the introduction advertised it as delivering a velocity of 3,160 feet-per-second using a 130-grain bullet. That got O’Connor’s attention and he ordered one with a Lyman 48 receiver sight. It proved to be a lifelong partnership between O’Connor and the cartridge.
   In the December 1943 issue of Outdoor Life, he wrote,“Assuming that a cartridge can make its way on merit alone, that cartridge is the .270 W.C.F. In its early years it sat in the corner, dressed in sackcloth and covered with ashes, while few riflemen suspected that underneath it had a figger like Miss America, a disposition like an angel, and thatit could bake pies like Mother used to make.”
   O’Connor used the cartridge all over the world and wrote reams of material about how well it performed in the hunting fields.
   I got my first .270 chambered rifle in about 1963 or so. I’ve not been without at least one rifle in that chambering since. I presently have five in my battery. Several others have passed through my safe during that time.
   All together, I’ve probably owned fifteen or twenty rifles, perhaps more, chambered for the .270, and all I’ve owned, except one, were superbly accurate. That one rifle had a nagging problem of putting the first shot through a cold barrel some 12 inches higher that the second and subsequent shots. After that first shot, it too placed the rest of its shots in very tiny groups. [Êàðòèíêà: i_014.jpg] 
   The .270 Winchester (right) compared to the .32–40 Ballard (center) and .223 Remington (left).
   The rifle was a very lightweight Husqvarna Mauser with a pencil thin 22" barrel, and stocked to the muzzle `ala Mannlicher. I sold it to a fellow that was going to have it custom stocked and he was sure that would solve the problem. I never found out if it did or not. All the rest that have come my way have been trouble free and deadly accurate.
   My favorite and the one that I’ve used the most by far, is my old David Miller Co. custom that I’ve owned since the mid-1980s. David started with a Mauser actioned Browning factory Safari Grade rifle. Before starting on the project, he took it to the range and found it was very accurate, shooting under MOA groups, so he retained the factory barrel. He went through the action inside and out, built a fine custom stock from English walnut, and sent it on its way to a client. Whether he cut the factory barrel or not I can’t say and I never asked.
   When I got the rifle, the barrel was 22". I suspect that in its factory guise, it was probably 24" but can’t say for sure.
   A couple years later, the owner of the rifle got seriously into competitive shotgun shooting, and traded the rifle in on a high-grade shotgun. David found out about it, and bought the rifle from the dealer and offered it to me for a reasonable price (for a Miller rifle).
   I’ve used it for most of my hunting since. My handload for it consists of 59.5 grains of H4831 pushing any good 130-grain bullet. That gives me 3130 fps through the 22" barrel, and that load has taken everything from a 50–60 pound roe deer up to and including a 1500 pound Alaska-Yukon moose, andabout everything in between those extremes. If there is a better killer of animals in those ranges, I’ve yet to find it.
   O’Connor wrote of loading his .270s a bit hotter than I do. His load was 62 grains of H4831 pushing a 130-grain bullet at about 3,200 fps. He must have used a super drop tube for those loads as that has to be a really compressed load.
   I loaded a few rounds at 60 grains, but they weren’t as accurate as my 59.5-grain loads, so I standardized on that load. It has worked exceedingly well in all of my .270 rifles except one. I have a Heym SR-20 rifle that must have a tighter chamber or tighter bore as my load is a bit warm in that rifle. I dropped back to 58.0 grains in that rifle, which works just fine, and I lose very little velocity for some reason.
   As an aside that some might find interesting, the parent case for the .270 is most often thought to be the .30–06 case. However, Winchester, when developing the cartridge, did not use the .30–06 as the parent case, but rather the earlier, and slightly longer, 30–03 case. Why they did so is a mystery to me. Whatever the reason, the .270 has worked very nicely for almost nine decades now, and is still going strong.
   At my age, I’m sure I could keep one of my .270s, and get rid of everything else, and use but that one rifle for the remainder of my hunting that I have ahead of me. That, and my AYA Nr. 2 28 bore, would cover the waterfront. Hmmm, that’s a thought!
   Chapter 7
   9.3x62mm Mauser, Effective on About Everything [Êàðòèíêà: i_015.jpg] 
   Norma Oryx Soft Point 9.3x62 Mauser cartridge cartridges.
   In the late nineteenth century and well into the twentieth, the continental Europeans and the United Kingdom were busy expanding their spheres of influence around the world. No continent experienced these expansions more than Africa.
   The Dutch were busy in South Africa, the Portuguese in Mozambique, the Belgians in Zaire, the English in Kenya and Rhodesia, the French in Central African Republic and the Germans in Namibia and Tanzania as primary conquests. Most had a few other involvements as well.
   The English produced heavy caliber rifles as well as ammunition for them, suitable for the largest and most dangerous game the Dark Continent had to offer. Alas, while the UK products were excellent and reliable, they were quite expensive, out of the budget range for the average farmer/colonist.
   The German colonists living in German SW Africa and German East Africa were very active in complaining to the home country for their need for affordable rifles and ammunition suitable for use against Africa’s big and dangerous game animals.
   Germany was already producing what was to become the best bolt-action rifle available with their Mauser Model 98. They just didn’t have a powerful enough cartridge to fit in a standard Model 98 length, to do battle against Africa’s dangerous fauna.
   Early in the twentieth century, a gunsmith by the name of Otto Bock, took on the task of developing such a cartridge. In 1905, he introduced the results of his developmental efforts, the 9.3x62mm cartridge — also known as the 9.3x62 Mauser.
   The cartridge featured a 9.3mm bullet diameter (.366") loaded into a 62mm long rimless case. The cartridge was originally loaded with a 285-grain bullet with a muzzle velocity of 2150 fps. It fit nicely in a Mauser 98 action, and operation and feeding was excellent. Later, the cartridge was juiced up a bit, and loaded primarily with a 286-grain bullet with a muzzle velocity of around 2400 fps.
   The CIP established a Maximum Average Pressure of 56,500 psi. In modern strong rifles, there is no reason that it could not be safely loaded to 60,000 psi, providing around 2500 fps, if such was deemed desirable. The cartridge became exceeding popular in Europe and in Africa, and still is today.
   On this side of the Atlantic though, it scarcely ruffled a feather. Until recently, the last five years or so, no American manufacturer made a rifle for it, no American ammunition company loaded ammo for it, and the major American reloading components folks offered neither bullets nor brass for the 9.3x62. If someone happened to have a rifle so chambered, he was totally dependent upon European sources for loaded ammunition and components.
   Things have changed considerably in the past few years. Thanks largely to the efforts of writers like John Barsness, Chub Eastman, Phil Shoemaker, and to a much lesser extent, my modest efforts, the cartridge is gaining popularity by leaps and bounds. And, well it should. It is one hell of a cartridge.
   Even old John“Pondoro” Taylor, Anglophil that he was, even had good things to say about the 9.3x62 cartridge. He wrote in African Rifles and Cartridges, “I have never heard any complaints about the 9.3mm. Its penetration is adequate for anything. It has never had the write-up that certain other calibers received from time to time. Men just take it for granted and it goes steadily on its way like some honest old farm horse. In spite of all the more modern magnums and ‘supers,’ the 9.3mm still remains the favorite medium bore of many experienced hunters.”
   Today, factory loaded ammunition is available from Federal, Barnes, Hornady, Nosler, and I believe that Winchester has been loading it for some time for European consumption, but, to my knowledge, none has been sold in this country. Bullets are available from a variety of bullet makers in weights from 232 grain (Norma) to a whopping 320 grains (Woodleigh) and about every stop in-between those extremes.
   I can’t imagine a better cartridge for chasing elk in heavy timber, rooting a mad brown bear out of the alders, or laying on the winters meat supply by taking a moose in the willows. There is no whiz-bang about the cartridge.
   As Pondoro Taylor put it, it’s just a workhorse of cartridges, effective and useful on about anything.
   Chapter 8
   The Amazing .30–06 Springfield [Êàðòèíêà: i_016.jpg] 
   A hunter with a rifle chambered .30–06 Springfield will find the world his oyster.
   There is now, and has been since the Chinese invented gunpowder, a continuing debate seeking the mythical“best all-around cartridge.” One can make a really convincing argument for the .30–06 as that cartridge.
   Excluding the elephant, Cape buffalo, rhino, hippo, and I might add lion of Africa, and, perhaps another animal or two from elsewhere, an accurate rifle using proper bullets in the old Springfield will get most any job done convincingly.
   Fortunately, most of us do not have to make that kind of decision as we can select a cartridge that is essentially ideal for a particular animal being hunted. How this really splendid cartridge came about is an interesting story.
   In 1898, the Spanish-American war broke out. While US power prevailed handily, it was not without some eye-opening experiences.
   At the time, the standard military armament was the .30 Government (.30–40 Krag) and the 6mm Lee Navy. The Krag was loaded with a 220-grain round-nosed bullet with a velocity of 2000 fps, whereas the opposition were armed with Mauser rifles chambered for the 7x57 cartridge loaded with lighter weight spitzer bullets at a much faster velocity.
   Both the 7x57 cartridge and the Mauser rifles that fired it proved to be far superior to the arms and ammunition carried by our soldiers. When that fracas was over, the military planners set about designing a new rifle and a new cartridge.
   Most of Europe had rearmed with spitzer bullet designs when the military introduced the new Springfield rifle and the equally new .30–03 cartridge to accompany it in 1903. Unfortunately, the .30–03 service cartridge was loaded with the same 220-grain round-nose bullet as the Krag. They did increase the velocity to about 2300 fps, but it still fell well behind the European developments in performance.
   The cartridge was then redesigned with a slightly shorter neck to accommodate a spitzer flat-based bullet weighing 150 grains and developing a muzzle velocity of around 2,700 fps. The Springfield rifles brought out for the .30–03 cartridge were modified to accept the new cartridge, designated the M1906 cartridge. [Êàðòèíêà: i_017.jpg] 
   The .30–06 Springfield know today has gone through many evolutions. One of its first was a shorting of its neck from the .30–03 to better hold the flat-based spitzer bullet.
   Several modifications were made to the loading of the cartridge from time to time and for various reasons. In 1938, the M2 Ball cartridge, loaded with a 151 grain, flat base bullet and delivering a minimum of 2,740 fps velocity, became the standard issue ammunition for military rifles and .30 caliber machine guns until the cartridge was replaced by the 7.62x51(.308) NATO service round.
   It didn’t take long before the US commercial rifle and ammunition manufacturers began producing both rifles and ammo for the new military cartridge, and, as the old saying goes, “the rest is history.”
   In its long history, it has been loaded in about every bullet weight available in .30 caliber. The lightest bullet weight that I’ve seen commercially loaded was the 110-grain bullet, and the heaviest, the 220-grain bullet. I’ve heard of lighter than 110-grain and heavier than 220-grain bullets loaded in custom ammo, however.
   A quick look in the ammo section of the 2014 68th edition of Gun Digest reflects ammo available loaded with bullets weighing 55, 125, 150, 152, 165, 168, 170, 178, 180, and 220 grains. If that doesn’t cover the waterfront, I don’t know what would.
   Personally, I don’t subscribe to the one-gun fits all theory anyway. I suspect the .30–06 is probably as close as it gets to fitting that one gun does all requirements, but it is still a compromise on the upper and lower ends of the spectrum.
   Even so, dead is dead and there are ample examples to prove it will work in the right hands and with the proper bullets. A friend of mine killed a Cape buffalo too dead to bellow using a .30–06. He had to get special permission from the game department to do so. A bum shoulder followed by less than 100 % successful surgery limited the amount of recoil he could tolerate. The .30–06 was his limit.
   Also, the late Jack O’Connor’s lovely wife Eleanor brained an elephant too dead to wiggle with a single .30–06 round. The late Hosea Sarber, an Alaskan Game and Fish Agent and well-known guide for those huge Alaskan brown bears, used a .30–06 as his back-up rifle for his clients after the big bruins.
   Still, as the late outdoor writer, guide, and who knows what else Bob Hagel wrote— or at least it is attributed to him — that one should not carry a rifle that works well when everything goes right, but, rather one that will carry the day when everything goes wrong, or words to that effect. There is merit to that argument.
   I have two rifles in my safe chambered for the .30–06 cartridge. One of them is a lovely custom Model 70 stocked by Gary Goudy. I have had it to Africa twice, once in Tanzania where I took a zebra, East African impala, and a Grant’s gazelle, and as my only rifle in Namibia where I took a mountain zebra, gemsbok, springbok, and a huge eland.
   In Tanzania I used 165-grain Barnes TSX bullets and in Namibia, due to the eland on the menu, I used 180-grain Norma Oryx bullets. It worked just fine, and I expected no less.
   An added bonus to using a .30–06 is that I have never been in a business that sold ammunition in any form, that didn’t have .30–06 fodder in stock.
   Chapter 9
   7.62x51mm NATO or .308, Either Way it Packs a Punch [Êàðòèíêà: i_018.jpg] 
   The 7.62x51 NATO or .308 Winchester offers nearly the same ballistics as a .30–06, but in a more compact cartridge.
   First, let’s start this discussion with a comparison between the 7.62x51 NATO cartridge and its civilian counterpart, the .308 Winchester. The differences between them are very small, but they are not precisely the same.
   Since the cartridge was designed to be the NATO standard military battle rifle cartridge, the military specification for the NATO round required a thicker brass cartridge case, and established a maximum chamber pressure of 50,000 psi. On the other hand, the commercial .308 Winchester has no such brass thickness specifications, and the SAAMI established maximum chamber pressure is 60,000 psi.
   There are some other very minimal differences, but in practice it is generally safe to use the two cartridges interchangeably. If using .308 Win. ammo in a rifle chambered for the 7.62x51 NATO round, the shooter should pay close attention to the overall condition of the rifle, as the commercial round is loaded to higher maximum pressures.
   The cartridge was developed in the 1950’s as the NATO standard small-arms cartridge. Standardizing a single cartridge for use among all the NATO allies provided a substantial advantage over the previous situation whereby each NATO nation was armed with its own cartridge with little, if any, interchangeability.
   The US military at the time was still armed with the M1 Garand .30–06. NATO adopted the cartridge as its standard in 1954. Winchester ammunition offered the commercial version of the cartridge to the marketplace in 1952, a couple years earlier than the NATO adoption. The US Army adopted the M14 rifle in 1957, and chambered it and the M60 machine gun for the 7.62x51mm NATO round.
   As an aside, I entered the US Army in 1960, and the M14 hadn’t yet reached Fort Gordon, Georgia by then. We were still using the old M1. I don’t remember when I saw my first M14, but it was sometime after that. I was on a couple military rifle teams during that era, and for our competitive shooting, we were using National Match M1 rifles. The M14 had a very short service life as the main battle rifle. Not very many years after its introduction, Vietnam got hot and hotter as time passed. [Êàðòèíêà: i_019.jpg] 
   The M14 was one of the first battle rifles specifically chambered for the 7.62x51 NATO cartridge. The popular semiautomatic M1A is also fed the round.
   In that jungle atmosphere, the M14 posed several problems.
   It was a long and reasonably heavy rifle, neither of which was well suited for the steaming jungles of RVN. In addition, the weight of the ammunition restricted the amount that could be carried by the individual soldier. The DOD folks did numerous studies and conducted countless tests finally arriving at the conclusion that in this case anyway, smaller really was better. They deduced that an 8-soldier unit armed with AR-15 rifles and .223 Remington ammo could outgun an 11-soldier unit armed with M14 rifles and 7.62x51 ammo.
   On the other hand, the .308 Winchester is still going strong. There is good reason for that fact.
   The difference in power between the .30–06 and the .308 Win is, on average, around 100 fps, using the same bullet weight. The cartridge will fit through a shorter action than the .30–06, which to some might offer an advantage. We could probably come up with other nits, but in reality no animal that ever lived could tell the difference in being squarely struck with a good 165 grain bullet traveling at 2700 fps, and the same good bullet 100 fps faster.
   I recently picked up a very nice .308 custom rifle built for someone else, with metalsmithing by Dave Talley. I haven’t been able to determine with 100-percent certainty who crafted the stock, but all indications point to the late Jere Eggleston as the maker.
   It is a terrific little rifle. It is built on an intermediate length Mauser action, and shoots like a dream. With the unlikely exception of another Cape buffalo hunt in Africa, I could comfortably and efficiently do all the remaining hunting I have left in me with this one rifle. So could most everyone else.
   Chapter 10
   The Life-Saving .357 Magnum [Êàðòèíêà: i_020.jpg] 
   The .357 Magnum became a popular law enforcement choice, after it was found the .38 Special did not have the stopping power to save officers’ lives.
   This powerful-for-the-time cartridge was introduced in 1934 and was an almost immediate success. It is, in essence, a .38 Special case lengthened by1/8th of an inch to prevent the possibility of firing the higher pressure round in chambers designed for .38 Special pressures.
   Wikipedia credits Elmer Keith, Phil Sharpe, D.B. Wesson of Smith& Wesson, and Winchester, for the development of the cartridge. The 3rd Edition of Mike Bussard’s Ammo Encyclopedia credits only Smith& Wesson.
   Elmer Keith writes in his book Sixguns as follows:“Next we have the .357 magnum Smith& Wesson cartridge. I worked with Doug Wesson on this development and sent him the first Keith bullets used in developing the load. We also put 1000 rounds of 173 grain Keith solids backed by 11 grains No. 80 through a .38/44 Heavy duty S.&W. Revolver just to see if it would take them or blow up. They developed an average of 42,000 pounds and the gun held them with no danger.”
   Phil Sharpe, in his book, Complete Guide to Handloading, wrote“The .357 Magnum cartridge was born in the mind of the author several years ago. On a hunting trip with Colonel D. B. Wesson, Vice-President of Smith& Wesson, a pair of heavy frame Outdoorsmen model revolvers were used with a large assortment of handloads developed and previously tested by the author. In the field they proved entirely practical, but Colonel Wesson was not content to attempt the development of a Magnum .38 special cartridge for ordinary revolvers, and set to work on a new gun planned in the field.”
   However, a bit later in the same chapter, he wrote,“The author is not connected with any arms or ammunition maker and desires this fact clearly understood. He did not design the gun or the cartridge, although he cooperated and collaborated in a minor way.” Why he chose to distance himself from the project, I have no idea. Perhaps he was concerned about liability issues.
   Both Keith and Sharpe mention Colonel Wesson and also Winchester in their writings on the .357 magnum, so it’s a safe bet that all were involved. [Êàðòèíêà: i_021.jpg] 
   The .357 Magnum is simply a .38 Special cartridge that has been lengthened by1/8 of an inch.
   For many years, starting around 1902, through essentially WWII, the chances of finding a police department armed with anything other than a revolver, either Colt or Smith& Wesson, chambered for the .38 Special cartridge, were about the same as finding a rooster with lips!
   Police files are rife with hair raising details of police shootings which involved multiple hits on criminals and still having the perp wound or even worse kill the officer(s) involved. I personally witnessed such an event many years ago. The policeman involved was a friend of my family.
   A few weeks before the incident, he had reluctantly accepted the job as Chief of Police of a small town. The town provided no equipment support and each LEO was required to provide his on handgun. The only one my friend owned was a WWII surplus 1911 auto in .45 ACP.
   He caught all manners of flak about carrying such a cannon, so he traded it in on a new S&W Chief’s Special. A few weeks later, while serving a warrant, he was involved in a shootout. He shot the perp several times, putting him on the ground, down but no where near out. The perp shot him from the ground and killed my friend instantly and he expired from his wounds later that evening.
   Had the LEO still been armed with the 1911, I’m sure the outcome would have been far different.
   Many police officers across the country upgraded their arms by adding a revolver chambered for the .357 magnum, often doing so at their own expense. While many Police Departments frowned on the practice, the officers could use either .38 Special or .357 magnum cartridges in the same revolver.
   These days, most PDs around the country have armed their officers with semi-auto pistols. Quite a few switched to the 9mm Luger, but it is my sense that many have gone to larger calibers such as the .40 S&W, 10mm, or even the .45 ACP.
   As I write these words, the US Army has announced that they are looking to replace the standard sidearm, the Beretta 9mm, with a larger, more powerful handgun/cartridge combination. I thought that they had learned that lesson in the Spanish-American conflict before the turn of the twentieth century.
   I guess the old adage, the more things change, the more they stay the same, applies.
   Chapter 11
   Sizzling Varmint Medicine, the .22-250 [Êàðòèíêà: i_022.jpg] 
   Whether as a wildcat or factory cartridge, there has always been something mystifying about the high-velocity .22-250.
   There is some considerable confusion as to when this popular varmint cartridge was developed, and who developed it.
   Its name comes from the fact that it uses a .22 caliber bullet, and the parent case is the .250 Savage. The parent case came out in about 1915, so it was sometime after that.
   The names associated with the cartridges development most often include Harvey Donaldson, Grosvenor Wotkyns, J.E. Gebby and J. B. Smith. Considerable development work went on in the mid-1930s.
   At least one version was called the .22 Varminter, and others, the .22-250. Wotkyns is generally credited with developing the forerunner to the .220 Swift, although Winchester chose to use the 6mm Lee Navy case, rather than the .250 Savage. Author, gunsmith and consummate handloader, Phil Sharpe, was an early fan of the .22-250.
   For many years the cartridge languished as a popular wildcat, until Browning announced in 1963 that they were adding the chambering to their rifle line.
   My old pal, mentor, and good friend, John T. Amber, wrote in the 1964 issue of Gun Digest, the following:“Browning did an unprecedented thing this year — they added a caliber to their High Power rifle line, the Wildcat 22-250, for which no commercial ammunition I available! As far as I know, this is the first time a first line arms maker has offered a rifle chambered for a cartridge which he — or some other production ammunition maker — cannot supply.”
   The cartridge also has, in a way, a powder named for it. H-380 was an unnamed spherical rife propellent when the late Bruce Hodgdon first used it. When a 38.0 grain charge behind a 52 grain bullet gave one hole groups from his 22 caliber wildcat (now called the .22-250), he appropriately named the powder H380. [Êàðòèíêà: i_023.jpg] 
   Ever since the .22-250 has gone from wildcat to factory cartridge, varmints have been shaking in their boots.
   I’ve also heard that the velocity delivered with that load, around 3800 fps, played a role in the decision though that may also be just so much fluff.
   I have owned at least a couple rifles so chambered for many years now. When I tire of one and get rid of it for something, at the time anyway, that’s more spectacular, I end up down the road always picking up another.
   I currently have two, a heavy varminter from Savage that has had a few custom touches added to it (another stock for one thing) and a Mark VII medium weight varminter from E.R. Shaw. Both are superbly accurate.
   I don’t do a lot of varmint shooting here in southeastern Arizona, but when I do go out, one or the other of these two rifles goes with me.
   Chapter 12
   338 Winchester Magnum, the Original Alaskan [Êàðòèíêà: i_024.jpg] 
   The .338 Winchester Magnum (top) compared to the .375 H&H (bottom).
   This cartridge is a very good medium-bore cartridge that was introduced by Winchester, along with the .264 Magnum and the .458 Magnum, in about 1958.
   They named the Model 70 rifle chambered for the .338“The Alaskan, a pretty good indication of the type of game the Winchester developers figured it would be most useful on. It was pretty much and immediate success among Alaskan guides and residents alike.
   The cartridge most likely had its origins in the efforts of three men in the late 1940s, experimenting with a couple similar cartridges. The men were Charles O’Neil, Elmer Keith, and Don Hopkins, and the cartridges were the .333 OKH and the .334 OKH.
   The .333 OKH was based upon a .30–06 case necked up to a .33 caliber bullet, and the .334 OKH used a shortened .375 H&H case necked down for the same bullet. The .338 Winchester Magnum also used a shortened and blown-out .375 H&H case, necked down to accept a .338 caliber bullet.
   Elmer used his .333 OKH as his second rifle on his first African Safari, and as I now recall it was a custom Mauser built by Montana rifle smith Iver Hendriksen. I vividly recall reading his descriptions of some of the difficulties he encountered using the cartridge.
   He was using English made bullets and their performance on game was pretty dismal. The failures were in no way the fault of the cartridge, but rather the construction of the bullets. We are very fortunate these days to have plenty of really excellent bullets. Members of the Keith era were not so fortuitous.
   I also recall reading in Keith’s writings that the .333 OKH became the .338 Win magnum, and the .334 OKH, became the .340 Weatherby. I suspect that there is a lot of truth in those comments.
   The .338 is an excellent cartridge for larger big game. It is a great elk rifle when hunting wapiti in heavy timber. It is as good as any cartridge on big moose (and eland in Africa), and it really shines on the big bears.
   One well-respected outfitter in Alaska used to require his bear guides to carry a .338 chambered rifle when chasing the bruins. Whether that is till the case or not, I can say. [Êàðòèíêà: i_025.jpg] 
   When a motivated bruin is bound and determined for a up-close meet and greet, it’s nice to have the insurance the .338 Winchester Magnum allots.
   When a motivated bruin is bound and determined for a up-close meet and greet, it’s nice to have the insurance the .338 Winchester Magnum allots.
   Ammunition is available loaded with an assortment of good bullets, weighing from 200 grains to 300 grains. For normal use in the field doing anything other than backing clients on big bears, bullets in the 225–250 grain range are perhaps the most useful.
   There isn’t much that a 225 grain quality bullet cruising along at about 2,800 fps won’t handily take care of. It is a relatively high pressure cartridge with the SAAMI recommended average pressure at 64,000 psi, and the CIP a bit less at 62,000 psi.
   In my hunting career, I have had but one occurrence where an animal decided to test my mettle by taking me on. It was an Alaskan brown bear, and I was armed with a custom pre-64 Model 70 chambered for the .338 Win. Mag. loaded with handloaded ammo using 210 grain Nosler partition bullets.
   I won’t get into the details, but since I’m writing these lines, needless to say, it worked.
   Chapter 13
   416 Rigby, of Harry Selby Fame [Êàðòèíêà: i_026.jpg] 
   African Professional Hunter Harry Selby was one of the driving forces in popularizing the .416 Rigby.
   We often hear the story that the .270 Winchester was a cartridge made successful by one man, Jack O’Connor. Well, I think that is a bit of an exaggeration.
   There is no question that O’Connor’s writing about his experiences with the cartridge helped it along immensely, he didn’t “make” it. The cartridge was good enough to make it on its own, O’Connor just speeded up the process.
   Another cartridge that has been very successful in the game fields of the world whose success has largely been attributed to one man is the .416 Rigby cartridge and African Professional Hunter, Harry Selby. How that came to be is an interesting story.
   Like all self-respecting Professional Hunters in Africa, Harry Selby used a heavy caliber English double rifle for his work. On one safari, his trusty double managed to get run over by the Land Cruiser, causing enough damage that it had to be returned to England for repairs which would take several months to complete.
   In the interim, Selby visited a gunshop in Nairobi and purchased a John Rigby made Mauser rifle chambered for the .416 Rigby cartridge. It worked so well for him that even after his double was repaired, he never went back to it and remained with his .416 magazine rifle.
   Here’s what John “Pondoro” Taylor had to say about it in his iconic book African Rifles and Cartridges, “John Rigby clinched his reputation as African gunsmith when he placed his .416 Mauser on the market for heavy and dangerous game. If for any reason you prefer a magazine rifle to a double, there is no finer or more satisfactory weapon for all-around use against dangerous animals than this .416.”
   He also wrote,“This was Blunt’s favorite rifle, and the weapon with which Daly shot most of his elephant.”
   The cartridge was designed by John Rigby& Company in 1911 as a magazine rifle suitable for use in India and Africa. At about the same time, Jeffery came out with its .404 cartridge and Westley Richards with its .425, all designed for magazine rifles. These three cartridges were made possible largely due to the development of Cordite smokeless powder and mauser’s great 98 Mauser action. Both the .404 and .416 became very popular in Africa — the .425 less so. [Êàðòèíêà: i_027.jpg] 
   The .415 Rigby was the choice of professional hunters who were looking for a magazine-fed rifle.
   The original loading of the .416 Rigby used a 410 grain bullet at 2300 fps. This was later standardized with a 400 grain bullet at 2400 fps. Even at the higher velocity, the big cartridge is really loafing with about 47,000 psi chamber pressure. Compared to some of the newer .416 loadings, they reach the same general ballistics as the Rigby, but at much higher pressures, well over 60,000 psi.
   The downside to the large case is that, in general, a large magnum action is needed to house it. It was designed around the Mauser No. 5 Magnum action. Most Rigby-made rifles used this action. However, a few were made on standard length 98 Mauser action by milling away a lot of metal. The one used by Harry Selby was one of these rifles.
   In its heyday, the only viable source of ammunition for the big .416, along with most of the other large bore cartridges of British origin, was from Kynoch. After the end of WWII, for numerous geo-politial reasons, the demand for large bore rifles and ammunition decreased substantially.
   Ultimately, Kynoch ceased production of all ammunition, including the big Rigby .416. As a result, most of the English express rifles withered on the vine. It remained that way, with African hunters switching to cartridges that were still being manufactured.
   Winchester came out with it’s Model 70 chambered for the .458 Winchester cartridge. Many professionals, including Selby, made the switch. Initially, the .458 had some growing pains, but they were finally sorted out.
   This was the sad situation until a young American by the name of Jim Bell came along and started a company called B.E.L.L., standing for Brass Extrusion Laboratories Ltd. His small company literally resurrected the large bore rifles from premature deaths, by providing the means to produce ammunition for them. The .416 Rigby is among those resurrected.
   Chapter 14
   6mm/.244 Remington and the Name Game [Êàðòèíêà: i_028.jpg] 
   The 6mm/.244 Remington traveled a twisting road on its way to gaining a foothold in the shooting world.
   The 6mm Remington cartridge dimensions, and the .244 Remington cartridge dimensions, are exactly the same. However, rifles chambered for the cartridge and factory loaded ammo for each usually differ a bit.
   The reason for this anomaly, at least to me it is an anomaly, makes an interesting story. Remington has done it at least once more that I’m aware of, and perhaps more than that. More later on this issue.
   In 1955, both Remington and Winchester introduced similar 6mm cartridges to the marketplace. Winchester’s version was the .243 Winchester, and Remington dubbed their version the .244 Remington. The two cartridges were quite similar. Winchester made theirs by necking down .308 cases to 6mm and chambered its Model 70 and Model 88 lever action rifles for the new cartridge.
   Many other manufacturers began chambering for the cartridge shortly thereafter. Winchester developed the cartridge as a combination varmint round using lighter weight bullets, and a light deer/antelope rifle using 100 grain bullets. Winchester fitted their rifles with a 1:10 twist barrel, which would stabilize all bullet weights suitable for both purposes.
   Remington, on the other hand, saw their .244 cartridge as a varmint/predator cartridge and discounted any demand for it as a deer/antelope rifle. Therefore they fitted their rifles with a 1:12 twist, perfect for the 80–90 grain bullet weights, but wouldn’t always stabilize the 100 grain and heavier bullet weights that hunters wanted to use on deer and antelope. As the old adage goes, the rest is history. Winchester’s .243 became a very popular cartridge and Remington’s .244 almost withered on the vine, even though technically it offered slight advantages over the .243.
   Remington finally saw the error of their ways and in 1963, they changed the twist from 1:12 to 1:9, which would stabilize all available 6mm bullet weights available on the market. Since they realized that the damage had already been done to the .244 Remington, they changed its name at that time to the 6mm Remington. With the head start of the .243, the 6mm Remington has never caught up with the popularity of Winchesters offering, but it has, as best I can tell, become a reasonably successful cartridge offering for Remington, as well it should. [Êàðòèíêà: i_029.jpg] 
   The 6mm Remington has become a popular hunting round, effective on varmints up to deer.
   As mentioned earlier, it offers a slight ballistic advantage over its Winchester rival. Remington chose the 7x57 Mauser cartridge as the parent case for its 6mm offering, which gives it a slightly greater powder capacity than the .308 based .243. It also provides a slightly longer cartridge neck, which most handloaders prefer, including this one. Practically speaking, however, if that is permitted these days, they are ballistic twins. What one will do, so will the other and equally well.
   And now, as the late Paul Harvey used to say,“the rest of the story!”
   I mentioned earlier that Remington had changed cartridge names at least one other time that I am aware of. In that case, it was with the .280 Remington, the 7mm Remington Express, and back to the .280 Remington again. You’d think they would learn. The cartridge never changed, only the name, and for different reasons than the .244 vs. 6mm Remington debacle.
   Winchester introduced the .270 Winchester in 1925. I’ve written about it here in this series as it is one of my designated “greatest cartridges.” Remington did not have a really similar cartridge offering so in 1957, they introduced the .280 Remington (which had been around in a slightly different guise as the 7x64 Brenneke for even a bit longer than the .270 as it was introduced in 1917.)
   The .280 is basically the .30–06 case necked down to .284" with a couple slight modifications to prevent a .270 cartridge being chambered in a .280 chamber. The resulting cartridge is a very good one, in some ways a bit better than the .270, but it has never caught up with the .270’s head start.
   In an effort to boost sales, from 1979 to 1980, Remington cataloged the round as the 7mm Express Remington, which did nothing for sales and confused the hell out of a lot of folks! Again, they saw the error of their ways and went back to calling it the .280 Remington.
   Chapter 15
   44 Magnum a Silver Screen Sensation [Êàðòèíêà: i_030.jpg] 
   Through the urging of handloaders and outdoor writers, among them Elmer Keith, the .44 Magnum became a factory load in 1956. Smith& Wesson also released the Model 29, chambered for the round, the same year.
   The powerful .44 magnum cartridge, along with a new revolver to chamber it, the Smith& Wesson Model 29, were introduced to the shooting public in 1956. The shooting industry finally legitimized the big .44 after years of handloaders loading up the .44 Special cartridge to handle heavier bullets at increased velocities.
   Elmer Keith was a member of the group clamoring for the factories to build on their experiences and to introduce the cartridge and handguns to handle it. Elmer was a well-known and respected outdoor writer and his sermon from that bully pulpit carried a bit more weight with the industry than did the average handloader.
   Keith had loaded the .44 Special cartridge substantially heavier than the factory fodder available, for a long time, and proclaimed the improvements in the“improved” round long and loud. Industry finally heeded the message and the first two production S&W Model 29 revolvers went to Julian Hatcher of the American Rifleman and none other than Elmer Keith. Bill Ruger followed suit not long after and introduced a Ruger revolver later in 1956.
   As Elmer told the story in his book Keith An Autobiography (Later reworked and republished as Hell I Was There):“I wanted two things from Remington. I wanted them to factory-load my heavy .44 Special load, and I also wanted a 1-1/4-ounce Magnum 16-bore load that I’d been hand-loading successfully for years. There was no problem whatever on the 16-bore load. Petersen had called the boys all together, and they agreed on it right off the reel. But they were afraid of the old triple-lock Smith& Wesson .44 with my heavy loads. I told them I’d been shooting it for ten to fifteen years in the old gun I’d got from McGivern with no problems what-ever, fine accuracy, no undue pressure. However, they were skeptical of the old gun holding it. So I told them, ‘Why not make the case one-tenth inch longer and call it a .44 Magnum?’ They agreed that would be a good idea.” [Êàðòèíêà: i_031.jpg] 
   The .44 Magnum utilizes a case1/10 of an inch longer than the .44 Special. Increasing the brass’ length was meant to dissuade shooters from using the more potent round in the .44 Special.
   In the end, Remington agreed to make the ammo, and S&W agreed to wrap a handgun around it, and the .44 Magnum was born.
   The cartridge and new revolvers were popular enough after their introductions, but in a quirk of fate, the thing that really lit the flame of desire in many otherwise disinterested shooters was the release of the movie Dirty Harry in 1971 starring Clint Eastwood.
   After detective Harry Callahan began singing the praises of the“most powerful handgun” on the screen as well as mowing down the criminal element with his S&W Model 29, the firearms literally flew off the dealers’ shelves. Within a short period of time, it was almost impossible to find a Model 29 anywhere, and in the rare event one could be found, the selling price was well north of the MSRP. The factory couldn’t keep up with the orders and I was told were actually rationing Model 29s to their distributor/dealer network.
   In order to prevent a shooter from inadvertently stuffing a .44 Magnum round into one of the old revolvers chambered for the .44 Special cartridge, the Magnum case is a bit longer than the Special case, eliminating that potential disaster.
   The cartridge is factory loaded to between 1,300 and 1,500 fps depending on the load and bullet weight, and at pressures up to 36,000 psi. So loaded, it is a pretty fair hunting cartridge for a handgun, provided the shooter is experienced and can handle the recoil. It requires considerable practice to master. I was living in Alaska at the time of the height of its popularity, and .44 Magnum chambered revolvers were in great demand for carrying in bear country.
   Although designed as a powerful revolver cartridge, it didn’t take long after its introduction for manufacturers to come out with handy rifles chambered for the cartridge. Ruger brought out the first one that I’m aware of, a handy little semi-auto rifle. Marlin followed with a lever action rifle not long after, and these days there are quite a few available from several manufacturers.
   In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was not uncommon for a shooter to carry a sidearm and a handy rifle, both firing the same cartridge. Three such cartridges were the .32–20, 38–40, and 44–40. At one time, I owned a Winchester Model 73 and a Colt Single-Action, both chambered for the .44–40 cartridge. I wish I still had them.
   Chapter 16
   300 Weatherby Magnum, Still Packing a Punch [Êàðòèíêà: i_032.jpg] 
   When it was first developed the .300 Weatherby Magnum produced nearly unheard of velocities. Around 70 years later, and the round is still consider one of the world’s blistering hot magnums.
   I have been told, and I suspect that it is very accurate information, that the .300 Weatherby Magnum is the most popular cartridge in the Weatherby line of high intensity cartridges.
   Roy Weatherby initially developed four cartridges in the mid-to-late 1940s. These were the .220 Rocket, based on the .220 Swift case, and the first three of the Weatherby line of magnums, the .257 WM, 270 WM, and .300 WM. Weatherby’s brainchild developed a muzzle velocity of over 3500 fps with the 150 grain bullet, almost 3400 fps with the 165 grain, 3250 fps with the 180 grain, and over 3,050 fps with the 200 grain bullet. For the time, those velocities were eye-openers, and even today are still sizzling down range.
   The ballistics provided by the .300 Wby. made it about as close to ideal as one is apt to find for the all-around one-gun hunter. One example is that of C.J. McElroy, the founder of Safari Club International. Mr. McElroy hunted all over the world and for many years used nothing but a Weatherby Mark V rifle chambered for the .300 Wby cartridge. He used it for almost everything he hunted. I knew Mac quite well and last time I saw the rifle, it was about as dilapidated as a rifle could be and still function.
   Mac was not a gun nut and to him, the rifle was nothing but a tool. He once told me that the rifle was like an extension of his arm in the field. Finally as the effects of his advanced age finally began to affect him, he switched rifles for the remainder of his hunting years. It was another Weatherby Mark V rifle, but chambered for the 7mm Wby. instead of another .300. [Êàðòèíêà: i_033.jpg] 
   There are those hunters who have found the Weatherby Mark V, chambered in .300 Weatherby Magnum to be all the gun they ever needed, no matter their quarry.
   Another well known international hunter that used nothing but a .300 Wby. chambered Mark V for his hunting was Elgin Gates. Gates wrote numerous magazine articles about his exploits with the rifle, and also wrote a book or two about his adventures with it. Both McElroy and Gates could have afforded most any rifle they wanted, but both were more than pleased with their Weatherby rifles.
   Well known custom rifle maker David Miller also is a one-rifle hunter. His hunting rifle is one of his own make, but chambered for the .300 Wby. David specializes in chasing big Coues deer around the mountains of southern Arizona and northern Mexico. He has taken more trophy bucks than anyone I know or have ever heard of.
   Now I fully understand that a very large Coues buck is not a very large animal, and a rifle as powerful as the .300 Wby. is not needed to slay such a buck. However, big trophy bucks are very wary animals, and if spotted at all, are generally seen at long ranges. Miller and his .300 have taken several book sized bucks at ranges exceeding 500 yards, a few exceedingly so.
   Personally, I have owned but one rifle chambered for that cartridge, a German-made Mark V that I bought in Germany at a US Army Rod& Gun Club in Stuttgart about 1964. I kept it for a while, but at the time had no real need for it, so traded it for something else, I’ve long since forgotten what. It was a pleasant rifle to shoot, very accurate with factory ammo (I hadn’t started handloading at the time), and an attractive rifle, even with its California styling. At the time, the styling was acceptable to me, although these days, it gives me the “vapors” as O’Connor used to write.
   The Weatherby line of“hyper” velocity cartridges was the earliest of the genre that I’m aware of. There were few, if any coming before, and plenty coming after. The downside, if it is a downside, is that in order to achieve such velocities, the cartridge is loaded to the max pressure wise, or very close to it. They also have considerable free-bore in the chamber to tame the high pressures somewhat.
   Still, I’ve not heard of a Weatherby rifle so chambered causing any damage. I have heard of a few blown primers, but that was about it. For the one gun hunter, a much worse choice could be made than the .300 Weatherby.
   Chapter 17
   6.5-284 Norma, the Long Shot [Êàðòèíêà: i_034.jpg] 
   The .284 Winchester almost slipped into obscurity, but was saved when it was embraced by F-Class and other long-distance shooters and was reborn as the 6.5x284 Norma.
   Back in 1963, the cartridge designers at Winchester introduced a new cartridge to the marketplace. Dubbed the .284 Winchester, it was designed specifically to produce ballistics equal to the .270 Winchester and .280 Remington, but in a case that was the same general length as the .308 case that would fit in the Winchester Model 100 autoloader and the Winchester Model 88 lever action rifles.
   They succeeded by designing a rebated rim case with a greater diameter that provided a powder capacity about the same as the .270 and .280.
   Although the designers met their design goal, the cartridge, and the rifles it was designed for, turned out to be considerably less than a smashing success. Savage made a few Model 99s in that chambering, and Ruger also did a run of M77 rifles chambered for the cartridge. To my knowledge, no other cartridge manufacturer except Winchester ever loaded the cartridge.
   By all reasonable measures, an unpopular cartridge chambered in relatively unpopular rifles, and available from only one source, should quickly disappear from the market. The .284 Winchester cartridge was headed in that direction and would have made it there quickly had it not been for one factory.
   Wildcatters found the case design suited the development of a few very useful non-standard cartridges, primary of which was the 6.5-284, legitimized by the Swedish ammunition maker Norma in 1999 and renamed the 6.5-284 Norma cartridge. The reason— the cartridge found its niche among long-range target shooters.
   I am told that these days it is the most widely used non-wildcat cartridge in F-Class and 1000 yard benchrest matches. For awhile, a variation of the 6.5-284 Norma held the 1000 yard benchrest record of 1.564 inch! That record was broken (group size 1.403") in 2007, but the cartridge is still very popular with long-range competitors.
   It is slowly gaining an inroad into the hunter’s market as well.
   The 6.5mm chambering in various forms have long been popular in Europe and in Africa, but have gained acceptance in the US market very slowly. The US sporting market aversion to any cartridge designated with a mm following it has long had a very hard row to hoe among American shooters. That seems to be changing however. [Êàðòèíêà: i_035.jpg] 
   For awhile, a variation of the 6.5x284 Norma held the 1000 yard benchrest record of 1.564 inch group!
   Even my old pal and fellow curmudgeon David Petzal, seems to have taken a liking to the cartridge. Dave, for those readers that have been languishing under a very large rock for a half-century or so, has been writing for Field& Stream since the era of the quill pen and ink well. He has, during those many decades, earned the enviable reputation of not liking much of anything. However, even Dave wrote a two-part review of the 6.5-284 Norma in his Field& Stream blog that is reasonably favorable. Reasonably favorable from Petzal would be the equivalent of a gun-wrenching, wall climbing, flag waving, brass-band booming hoopla coming from anyone else.
   He found the cartridge capable of extreme accuracy, while delivering the goods with light recoil. Typical of Petzal, he also wrote,“And one other fringe benefit: If, when someone asks you in hunting camp what caliber your rifle is, and you say “6.5-284,” people will have no idea what the hell you’re talking about and will think you know all about guns and shooting. I’ve been dining off this for years.”
   I sure wish I had come up with that one!
   Chapter 18
   458 Winchester Magnum, Taming Dangerous Game [Êàðòèíêà: i_036.jpg] 
   When facing brutes, such as Cape Buffalo, the .458 Winchester Magnum has become the modern standard. Dangerous game hunters wouldn’t want to face Mbogo with anything less.
   In the days when“the sun never set” on the British Empire, the colonization of vast areas on the African continent and most all of India resulted in a requirement for heavy caliber, powerful rifles and ammunition to protect the homesteads from large and often dangerous animals.
   In addition, a fledgling business of outfitting and guiding foreign hunters in pursuit of these animals was developing, primarily in Kenya, but spreading throughout the continent. Rifles chambered for such exotic sounding names like .470 Nitro Express (NE), 475 #2 NE, 500 NE, and many others, along with the necessary ammunition, began showing up in both Africa and India. With few exceptions there was but one source of the necessary ammunition, and that was the UK firm called Kynoch.
   Things went along just peachy for a while. Eventually, however, Kynoch learned that, as necessary as the ammunition manufacture for these big game cartridges was, they couldn’t make any money loading them. The volume requirements required to make it profitable just weren’t there, so, they did what prudent businessmen do and ceased production on most of the cartridges. This had the effect of turning lots of very handsome and very expensive firearms effectively into boat anchors. Without ammunition they were essentially useless.
   In the early fifties, the Management at Olin Corp. saw an opportunity to fill the void by introducing their famous Winchester Model 70 bolt action rifle in some new chamberings, one of which was designed specifically for dangerous-game hunting in both Africa and India. They called it the .458 Winchester Magnum.
   Olin introduced it to the shooting world in 1956. It was designed to duplicate the ballistics of the .450 NE, 470 NE and other similar cartridges. Winchester engineers modified and shortened the .375 H&H cartridge case, and loaded a 500 grain bullet in front of enough powder to provide a muzzle velocity of about 2150 feet per second (FPS), basically replicating the Nitro Express cartridges ballistically. [Êàðòèíêà: i_037.jpg] 
   A comparison of different .458-caliber ammunition. From the left, 458 Winchester Magnum, 458 Lott, 460 Weatherby Magnum.
   Olin then hired African Professional Hunter David Ommanney to be their“Winchester’s Man in Africa,” and followed up with a blistering advertising campaign to sell both rifles and ammunition. It became an initial success, with PHs, wardens, wildlife managers and other professionals, along with the few visiting hunters venturing to that part of the world searching for elephant, buffalo, rhino, lions, tigers, etc., arming themselves with the new development.
   The .458 Winchester Magnum became the world standard dangerous-game cartridge rather quickly, due in part to the fact that both the ammunition and rifles to shoot it were very substantially less expensive than British-made rifles, particularly since no ammunition was being produced for them.
   Alas, after a few years in the field, problems began cropping up. Muzzle velocities were often discovered to be substantially less than the advertised velocities, frequently less than 2000 fps instead of 2150, and erratic performance issues.
   Winchester investigated and found that the heavily compressed loads of ball powder that they were using, had a habit of clumping together causing fickle ignition and less than desirable performance. These were not welcome attributes for a dangerous-game rifle. Winchester addressed the problem and corrected it, but considerable damage was already done to the reputation of the cartridge.
   Well known outdoor writer Jack Lott, managed to get himself into a tussle with a cape buffalo he had wounded using the .458 Win Mag. Needless to say, he didn’t win the wrestling match and was hammered pretty good. He didn’t do Winchester any favors writing about his experience in the outdoor press. As a result of his experience, he lengthened the .458 Winchester cartridge case by .300" and called his creation the .458 Lott. The added powder capacity, as well as advances in powder technology, made achieving Winchester’s goal with the Win Mag round easily achievable.
   Even so, the .458 Winchester Magnum set the standard for dangerous-game cartridges.
   Most ammunition manufacturers load factory ammo for it, and most rifle manufacturers make rifles chambered for the round. In spite of past glitches with the ammo, it works and it works very well. Armed with a quality rifle chambered for the .458 Win Mag, and the ability to shoot it accurately, the hunter need fear very little in today’s hunting world.
   Chapter 19
   The Many Uses, Iterations of the 12-Gauge Shotshell [Êàðòèíêà: i_038.jpg] 
   With the ability to be loaded with many projectiles or just one, there are few other rounds with as much versatility as the 12-gauge shotshell.
   Perhaps the most versatile and popular cartridge on the face of the earth is the 12 gauge shotshell.
   The only cartridge that I can think of that might equal it in popularity is the .22 rimfire, if there is any ammo for them left. Judging from the availability of ammo for them around my neck of the woods, feeding that popularity with ammo might be difficult. But, I digress.
   Practically every hunter owns at least one 12 bore shotgun. Sport shooters shooting trap, skeet or sporting clays for entertainment or competition, likewise own one or more scattergun so chambered, usually more.
   Even among non-hunters and sport shooters, at least in my part of Kentucky during my growing up years, practically every farmhouse had a shotgun handy, usually a 12 bore. Among hunting families of that era, it was a right of passage to manhood for a young lad to graduate from the .410 or 20 bore single-shot scattergun that he started with, to a grown up 12 bore.
   At some point in our history, some bright fellow figured out that it would be much easier to hit their intended target when unleashing numerous projectiles rather than just a single one. The 12-gauge gun could be used for single projectiles, originally round lead balls, graduating to the plethora of shaped shotgun slugs available on the market today, to an array of multiple projectile loads. From buckshot to birdshot, the scattergun uses had a large choice available to match the load to the intended target.
   In addition to the ample choice of projectile loadings, the user also has a choice when it comes to the length of the 12-gauge shell. Ammunition for the 12 bore has been loaded with shell lengths of 2", 2-1/2", 2-5/8th", 2-3/4 inch (most common), 3", and 3-1/2 inch that I know of. It could be that a few others were loaded that I’m not aware of. Naturally, the longer the shell case, the more powder and shot it will hold, creating a more powerful round. [Êàðòèíêà: i_039.jpg] 
   Wilhelm Brenneke invented the shotgun slug in 1898, which greatly improved shotgun performance for big game hunting over the round lead ball.
   The military also learned early on that a short barreled, smooth bore scatter gun was just the ticket for military use at close quarters. The same thinking applied to civilian police and security guard use. There were a number of Winchester Model 97“riot” guns in use in Vietnam. One scattergun was even used in the tussle at the OK Corral in Tombstone, wielded by none other than Doc Holliday. Practically every police cruiser has a tactical shotgun available, often carried in the trunk of the vehicle.
   Quite a number of our states, usually located in densely populated areas, require a shotgun loaded with slugs for deer hunting. Wilhelm Brenneke invented the shotgun slug in 1898, which greatly improved shotgun performance for big game hunting over the round lead ball. The shotgun has evolved into quite a potent and accurate big game load.
   Many shotguns designed specifically for big game hunting are equipped with rifled bore barrels and when loaded with slugs intended for use with rifled bore guns, are very accurate. They also greatly improve the effective ranges from around 40 yards or so for a hollow-base Foster type“punkin ball” slug to 100 yards and more for saboted slugs in rifled bore guns.
   A pretty good argument could be made that an individual armed with a .22 RF and a good 12 bore shotgun, is pretty much ready for most anything requiring a firearm, from defending his pea patch, to keeping food on the table.
   Chapter 20
   The Rise of the 5.56x45 NATO [Êàðòèíêà: i_040.jpg] 
   The adoption of the .223/5.56 NATO was accepted by the U.S. Military in 1963 and was then adopted by NATO as the standard caliber in 1977.
   At the time this cartridge was adopted for military use in the United States, we were in the middle of a great state of change.
   WWII was over with the US forces and it’s allies finally rolling over the Nazi powers in Germany, and then ending the conflict in Asia by dropping two newly developed and terrifying bombs on Nagasaki and Hiroshima. The ink was hardly dry on the surrender documents when we found ourselves embroiled on the Korean peninsula. We were in the process of changing from piston driven aircraft to the new fangled jet technology.
   The military also went through the throes of developing a new cartridge and a new rifle to handle it, and then replaced the M1 Garand chambered for the .30–06 with the M-14 rifle chambered for the 7.62x51 NATO cartridge. About the only thing this change did that was positive, was to finally achieve a NATO standard cartridge. The other issues, those of weight, power, and rate of fire, were essentially very little different from its predecessor.
   In the late 50s, the ArmaLite Company along with some others were working on a much smaller high velocity cartridge/assault rifle combination to address the shortfalls in the 7.62x51 cartridge and the M-14 rifle. Initially they considered using the commercially available .222 Remington cartridge, but it was apparent that the cartridge was too small to meet army established requirements.
   After considerable experimentation, Remington came out with a similar but larger round, calling it the .223 Remington. This cartridge, named the 5.56x45 by the military, along with ArmaLite’s M16 rifle, were adopted by the U.S. Military in 1963, and Remington introduced the civilianized version of the cartridge to the public a year later in 1964.
   The military determined that an 8-man team armed with the M16/5.56x45 combo would have the same firepower as an 11-man team armed with the M14/7.62x51. The difference was due to the size and weight differential between the two armaments. NATO agreed in 1977 to accept the 5.56x45 round as a NATO standard, with some minor variations in loading and bullet design. [Êàðòèíêà: i_041.jpg] 
   The light .223/5.56 NATO cartridge allowed soldiers more ammunition, thus allowed for an advantage in firepower.
   The acceptance of the M16 and its 5.56x45 cartridge was not without controversy. Initially, the rifle was criticized frequently after its introduction to the battlefield in RVN. It had a habit of jamming at most inopportune times. Some changes were made and most of those criticisms went away.
   There has been a continuing debate among the military as to the wisdom of eliminating much of the marksmanship training received by the military recruits, relying much more on firepower than on marksmanship, particularly at longer ranges.
   This debate continues, but the arguments are not against the 5.56x45 cartridge per se, but more against the training and employment doctrines. Those arguments will, most likely, continue until us old timers have all died off and no one remembers long range marksmanship training as it used to be.
   As a matter of interest, the 5.56x45 and the .223 Remington, while very similar, are not precisely identical. The military version is loaded to somewhat higher pressures than is the civilian version. There are some slight variations in some commercial chamber dimensions, and if the military 5.56x45 ammunition is fired in a .223 Remington chamber, SAAMI established pressure maximums can sometimes be exceeded.
   While I personally have never heard of any real problems from this situation, firing military ammo in commercial .223 chambered rifles is not a good idea.

Âçÿòî èç Ôëèáóñòû, http://flibusta.net/b/407352
